Our previous talk reminded us
that it’s possible
for a family to enjoy peace,
but it takes work.
Let’s look at one more step
that can help us stay on the road to peace,
and that is good communication.
A family promotes peace
when all the family members communicate
in an open, calm, and honest manner.
But how does communication help with peace?
Well, a pattern of good communication
keeps a family close.
It helps us to identify and address problems
before these reach a point
that they take peace away.
Now, that may seem obvious.
But isn’t it true that we may find
that between work and school,
the meetings and ministry,
and recreation and just life in general
it’s hard to find time
to communicate as a family?
Is that a challenge in your family?
In the following dramatization,
notice what habits
hinder family communication.
Hey, Steve.
Yeah, I’m sorry I was late to the meeting.
I should have been there
to help out with my assignment.
Yeah, we got delayed.
We’re late!
Let’s go, kids!
We’re coming! Sorry!
Yeah, the family is fine.
Everybody is adjusting really well.
Anyone seen my glasses?
Anyone?
I mean, we might be a little out of sync,
but I don’t know
—every family has their issues, right?
You going outside in those?
Mm-hmm.
Hey, well, thanks for understanding.
All right.
OK. Take care.
All right, bye-bye.
Did you notice some habits
that hinder family communication?
In the case of this family, it seems like
technology is stifling their communication.
And they obviously have some things
they need to communicate about
—punctuality, dress and grooming—
but it’s not happening.
Now, while the scenes of them
all looking at their devices
and ignoring one another
may have been a bit humorous,
did it remind you of your family at times?
What a good reminder
for us not to let the use of technology
rob our family of our time and attention!
So how can we develop habits
that promote good communication?
Let’s consider the second Bible principle
of this symposium.
Let’s turn together, please,
to Ephesians chapter 5.
And let’s read verses 15 and 16
—Ephesians 5:15, 16:
“So keep strict watch that how you
“walk is not as unwise but as wise persons,
“making the best use of your time,
because the days are wicked.”
Now, let’s look at two ways
that this Bible principle can help us.
The first is by making time
to have meaningful communication.
Did you notice there in verse 16
it says “making the best use of your time”?
Now, the study note for this phrase indicates
the need to ‘buy out the time’
for important things
from other pursuits.
So how can this apply
to family communication?
Well, this could include
having a plan, or a routine,
for when we spend time together
as a family each day.
And during those times,
we may choose to limit
our use of technology so that it
does not interfere with communication;
perhaps it’s in the evening
or at a specific mealtime.
One brother named Aaron stated,
“We have our evening meal together,
“which allows us time to talk
and hear what’s important
to each member of the family.”
He says: “My wife and I
have arranged our schedules
“so we take the boys
to school and pick them up.
This allows us to spend more time with them.”
And then he says,
“My wife and I regularly take walks
and freely talk about our concerns.”
What’s the point?
Well, they’re making good use of their time.
However, to do this, they’ve had to buy
that time out from other pursuits.
But they have a plan; they have a routine.
So, what plan, or routine,
does your family have
for meaningful communication each day?
If you don’t have one, can you start now?
Let’s look at the second way
that this Bible principle can help us.
And that is by determining when and how
to deal with problems when they do arise.
You notice verse 15 in Ephesians chapter 5
says that we should ‘walk as wise persons.’
It means we need
to choose our paths carefully,
knowing when to go, when to stop,
when to take another route.
Well, how can that help us
when problems arise?
Well, a wise person
generally knows when is and when is not
a good time to address a problem.
For example, we all can attest
that when emotions are high,
it’s probably not the best time
to bring up an issue.
One father states:
“Sometimes we need to wait
and let things cool.
“Often a night’s rest
with prayer makes a big difference
when we address the issue the next morning.”
That’s a wise person.
A wise person also listens.
James 1:19 reminds us to “be quick to listen,
slow to speak, [and] slow to anger.”
Thus, we can go to Jehovah in prayer
and ask him to help us to really listen,
to stay calm, to stay humble.
One sister named Dawn states,
“When there are problems,
the first thing I do
is ask Jehovah in prayer to help us
resolve the problem calmly.”
Then she says, “Then we talk
with the family member privately
and really try to listen
to their side of the issue.”
That’s a wise person.
A wise person will also consider the approach
and the words that he or she uses.
For example, rather than telling
our family member that they have a problem,
can we turn it around so that it’s something
that we all need to work on together?
Do you reassure your family members
that you really love them
and you want to understand
their side of the issue or the problem?
See, now, doing this,
we’re not attacking the family member
but, rather,
showing that we’re all in this together.
So we see benefits of this Bible principle
in communication in our family, don’t we?
You notice the two points:
(1) making the best use of our time
and (2) walking as wise persons.
Now, communication will always be
a work in progress,
but it’s worth the effort,
as it will go a long way
to bringing peace to your family.
Let’s watch more of our dramatization
and notice the benefits of developing habits
that promote good communication.
I don’t know.
What do you think?
We all have to work on it.
I know I need to.
Why don’t we approach it that way
with the kids
—just be open with them?
That sounds like a good idea.
OK. So Irene and I have been talking about
communication
in our family.
We wanted to talk
about our phones and other devices.
You’re not talking about me, are you?
You can’t do that.
No, no.
I know that we can all be
more balanced, but . . .
I need it.
You’re joking, right? You mean them.
You can’t take them away.
I haven’t done anything bad.
I have responsibilities.
Hold on.
You’re always on your phone too.
That’s true.
It’s OK.
Let’s just talk about it, all right?
Sue,
can you read Ephesians 5:15, 16
for us, please?
“So keep strict watch that how you walk
“is not as unwise but as wise persons,
making the best use of your time,
because the days are wicked.”
So
how do you think we’re doing
with our phones and other devices?
It isn’t that what you’re doing
on your devices is wrong.
Exactly.
But could it be taking time away
from more important things
—like talking to each other,
and in that way affecting even
how we’re talking to each other?
Yeah, I think it’d be smart
to have some boundaries then.
Yeah, OK.
OK.
Let’s talk about how we can do that.
Hey!
Hey, Olivia.
Hey.
Evidently, I haven’t figured out
how to talk to her about her clothes yet.
Hmm.
I need your help.
I got this one.
I know,
but it’s all about good spiritual judgment.
Do you think that these trends reflect
Jehovah’s view of “respectable dress”?
I know that you’ll do the right thing.
OK.
Hey, Gabe, can you take us?
Yeah, of course.
Mm-hmm.
While we’re all here,
I know we all have
different views on punctuality,
but
I really need your help
so that I can take care
of some of my responsibilities.
You think we can meet in the middle?
OK.
Yeah.
All right. Great.
Now, this symposium has been discussing
four Bible principles
that can guide families to peace.
Brother Dellinger considered the first one
at Romans 12:10.
And in this part, we considered
Ephesians chapter 5,
verses 15, 16.
Now, did we see how this scripture
helped our family in the video?
Well, we saw that they knew down deep
that they were not making
the best use of their time,
so they made changes.
They saw that they needed to set boundaries
so that they could improve
their communication.
We also saw how the family
—the parents—acted as wise persons.
How?
Well, by determining when and how
to address the problems
that needed to be addressed,
such as the use of technology,
dress and grooming,
and punctuality.
Well, can this Bible principle
help your family
—help my family—to improve communication?
Would this be a good scripture to include
in your next family worship?
Now, it takes time to learn how
to communicate well as a family.
But it is worth the effort.
Why?
Well, if we strive to communicate
well each day,
then communication will come more readily
when there are problems.
So be determined to look for ways
to improve communication in your family.
And by taking this initiative
and sticking with it,
you will be following the road map
to family peace.
Please listen now to Brother David Splane,
a member of the Governing Body,
as he considers the next talk
of this symposium,
“Follow the Road Map to Family Peace
—Work as a Team.”